---
layout: epic
title: Building tools with empathy
date: 2019-12-03
categories: [tools, road and bridges, people, culture]
author: justin
---

As engineers, we're surrounded by problems. There are the problems to be solved that differentiate our business,
but there are also countless problems related solely with how we do work every day. It's those little things, the
daily annoyances, that can be some of the most rewarding problems to solve. It's not always about changing the
world or revolutionizing an industry.

Solving the minor frustrations can change your coworkers' day for the better and that's a powerful feeling.

It's also a task that should be taken on with the same care and consideration that you'd give to your users. Just
as we don't (or shouldn't) rush into product work without considering it from multiple angles, neither should we
dive into a workflow nor build a tool for our team without considering the risks and impact.

In this post I'm going to explore how to think about building tools with empathy and how we can maximize our impact
while minimizing disruptions.

<!-- more -->

## Consider the cost

Nothing is free and that's especially true with software. There's a few different aspects of cost to consider
before starting to build a tool.

It may go without saying, but everything that you build has a maintenance cost. Depending on how complex and how
widely used the tool may be, you could face a meaningful drain on both your time and energy. That's especially true
if it's something you're working on outside of your primary responsibilities. Really take time to consider if the
value the tool will deliver is worth that personal cost.

Ensure you also consider the cost of learning and using the tool will have on your intended audience. If it's hard
to use and it doesn't make someone's life substantially better, they're likely not going to use it. If it's hard to
understand, same story.

Everything has a cost. Ensure the value you're providing offsets that cost. If it doesn't, rethink and try
something else... or just don't build it. That's always a valid option.

## Understand the user

Different users will have different proficiencies. If you're building a tool for other engineers on the team, maybe
a stack trace is good enough for encountered errors. A non-technical audience will likely just think the tool is
broken.

## Know the risks

## Set it up for success

The moment you share your tool and it becomes depended on by someone else you move from being a creator to a
steward. You can move on from the project, but it still exists. With this in mind, you owe it to yourself and those
who follow after you to add good documentation about how to do whatever work needs to be done to keep it going. Is
there a special deployment strategy? Document it. Is there a weird dependency? Document it. Make sure the intent,
common usage, and failure modes are all clearly documented too. This helps ensure the tool _can_ survive your
tenure.

One of the most critical interactions your tool will have with it's users is when it errors. Good error messages
educate your users and empower them to work past the error without having to rely on you to figure out what went
wrong.

## Over-communicate

There's an important lesson about change that I've learned recently. Often, the communication surrounding a change
is what dictates its perception. Great work can be soured by poor communication.

If you're to this point then you should have an idea of what you're doing, why you're doing it, who it helps, and
what may go wrong.

## Ship it

## You are not your work

I've saved this for last because it's a topic that I've struggled with a lot. When you're doing work you care about
it's easy to form personal attachments to that work. It's an expression of your self that you've put out in the
world hoping to create a positive impact. Inevitably though, things don't always work out how you expect. Maybe it
fails in a spectacular way... or maybe someone just doesn't like it. Whatever the case may be it can be hard not to
hear feedback about your work as feedback about you. If you've felt this before or you're feeling it now I just
want say, It's okay. Your feelings are valid. Feel what you feel, but then remember: You're more than just your
work. That setback is just an opportunity to learn and improve. It's just a tiny pebble from the mountain of work
you'll put out into the world.

The only failures are experiences that we don't learn from. So take that experience if it comes and give it the
time it needs. Reflect on it, feel it, and then think about what you could do better, learn from the experience,
and move past it. The next thing you do will be better for this experience.

## Wrapping up

Now you know what you're building. You know who you're building it for and what their needs are. You have, to the
best of your knowledge, an understanding of what pitfalls to avoid. You've invested in the project so that it has
everything it needs to live on past your tenure. You've told your teammates all about it, showed it off in every
possible venue, and shipped it out to the world.

And with that friends, I bid you adieu.

Go out and build great things.

You've got this.
